(DOCSP-27010) Add Realm React support to Manage Flexible Sync Subscriptions (#2588)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/react-native/sync-data/flexible-sync.txt

   :depth: 3
   :class: singlecol

Flexible Sync uses subscriptions and permissions to determine which
data to sync with your App. The ``@realm/react`` library streamlines permissions
and queries for you.

.. include:: /includes/note-flexible-sync-prerequisite.rst

Before You Begin

> ----------------

Reviewer: similar to previous conversations, shouldn't this be 'prerequisites'?

To use Flexible Sync in a React Native client:

#. :ref:`Configure Flexible Sync <enable-flexible-sync>` on the Atlas App Services backend
#. :ref:`Initialize the app client <react-native-app-client-configuration>` 
#. :ref:`Authenticate a user <react-native-login-anonymous>` in the client
#. :ref:`Open a synced Realm <react-native-flexible-sync-open-realm>` in the client

.. _react-native-sync-subscribe-to-queryable-fields:

Align Subscriptions with Backend App

> ------------------------------------

Reviewer: i think this section requires expansion **in a future unit of work**. probably should be a dedicated page similar to https://docs-mongodbcom-staging.corp.mongodb.com/realm/docsworker-xlarge/DOCSP-27010/sdk/swift/sync/write-to-synced-realm/

Author: Ticket created: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-28294

Your client-side subscription queries must align with the Device Sync configuration
in your backend App Services App.

Subscription queries return all objects of a type. You can filter query results

> with a Realm Query Language query that includes one or more queryable fields.

Reviewer 2: Lot of `query` in the sentence, but I can't think of a better way to word it to stay technicaly correct.

To learn more about configuring queryable fields, refer to 
:ref:`Queryable Fields <queryable-fields>` in the App Services documentation.

To learn more about the limitations of using Realm Query Language with Flexible Sync,
refer to the :ref:`Flexible Sync RQL Limitations
<react-native-flexible-sync-rql-limitations>` section.

Define Your Subscriptions with Hooks
------------------------------------

> The ``@realm/react`` library provides hooks that streamline how you define 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``@realm/react`` library provides the ``useQuery()`` and ``useObject()`` hooks that streamline how you define 
```

subscriptions in the React Native SDK.

> Then, use the hooks in components that are nested within ``<RealmProvider>``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to use the hooks, components must be nested within the ``<RealmProvider>``.
```

This is more inline with the code example below, as it doesn't actually show using any hooks.

Reviewer 2: Also, this setup code is probably defined somewhere else in the documentation.  This could probably just be a linked prerequisite, unless you want to show how to use `initialSubscription` in the `RealmProvider`

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/configure-realm-sync.test.snippet.configure-realm-sync.tsx
   :language: javascript

Get Collections with useQuery()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``useQuery()`` hook returns a ``Realm.Results`` collection that contains all 
objects of a given type in your realm. The hook will automatically monitor the
collection and re-render its parent component when changes to its objects are detected.

This hook doesn't update any subscriptions on its own. You should pass a class 
that extends ``Realm.Object`` to this hook. Alternatively, you can pass a string
that matches the name of your class.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/manage-subscriptions.test.snippet.usequery.tsx
   :language: javascript

Get a Specific Object with useObject()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``useObject()`` hook returns a single Realm object for a given type and

> primary key. The hook updates if any properties on the returned object change.

Reviewer: i think these sections need to be rethought. right now, they don't actually talk about using these hooks to create sync subscriptions. they just are docs for creating the queries.

i think it'd be confusing to a reader for this stuff to be discussed first on page w/o clear reference to how they relate to sync subs.

Author: Agreed. I think I was trying to compensate for the lack of reference docs for these. I've removed these sections altogether, as they're more likely to confuse than help readers.

This hook doesn't update any subscriptions on its own. You should pass a class 
that extends ``Realm.Object`` to this hook. Alternatively, you can pass a string
that matches the name of your class.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/manage-subscriptions.test.snippet.useobject.tsx

>    :language: javascript

Reviewer 2: These sections show how to get data out of the local realm, but do not really show how to "Define Your Subscriptions".  The results of `useQuery` can be used to define a subscription.  `useObject` has little to do with flexible sync, it just retrieves a single item from the local realm using a primary key.
I think the most important thing to show first is how to use `realm.subscriptions.update` to define a subscription.  This is the least amount of effort a developer must take to start retrieving sync data.
Also we could show how to use the `initialSubscriptions` parameter in RealmProvider to setup a global subscription.

Author: Thanks, Andrew! See my comment to Ben about these sections: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/2588#discussion_r1119558561

When configuring Flexible Sync on the backend, you specify which fields your
client application can query. In the client application, use the
:js-sdk:`Realm.subscriptions <Realm.html#subscriptions>` property to
manage a set of subscriptions to specific queries on queryable fields.

If you're using ``@realm/react``, you can manage realm subscriptions inside of
a properly-configured ``<RealmProvider>``. There, the ``useRealm()`` gives you 
access to the currently-opened realm.

You can do the following with your subscriptions:

- Get a list of all subscriptions
- Add subscriptions
- Check subscription state
- Update a subscription with a new query
- Remove subscriptions

When the data matches the subscription, and the authenticated user has the
appropriate permissions, Device Sync syncs the backend data with the client app.

Subscription sets persist across sessions even if you no longer include
the subscription in your code.
Subscription information is stored in the synced realm's database file.
You must explicitly remove a subscription
for it to stop attempting to sync matching data.

You can specify a string name for your subscription. If you do not give your

> subscription a name, the name is set to ``null``.

Reviewer 2: It might also be good to mention that non-named subscriptions will be based upon the RQL string.  To this effect, if there is logic to change the RQL string at any point, it would be recommended to name the subscription in order to update it.

When you create a subscription, Realm looks for data matching a query on a
specific object type. In your Flexible Sync subscriptions, you can have
subscriptions on several different object types or several queries on the same
object type.

> The examples in this section assume that you have a properly-configured ``<RealmProvider>``.

Reviewer 2: A link to a "properly-conifigured" RealmProvder would be helpful

Author: I've re-worked the samples to include everything and removed this line. 😄

Get Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Within a ``<RealmProvider>`` that's configured for Flexible Sync, you can access

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to think of the use cases one would have where they actually need to get the subscriptions.  I think only deletion.  I don't know if I really have a suggestion here, I'm just voicing my opinions on this API.

Reviewer: i agree with andrew. think a good order would be:

1. Add a Query to the Set of Subscriptions
2. Open a Realm with Initial Subscriptions
3. Get Subscriptions
4. Check the Status of Subscriptions
5. Remove Subscriptions

Subscription information is stored in the synced realm's database file.
You must explicitly remove a subscription
for it to stop attempting to sync matching data.

You can specify a string name for your subscription. If you do not give your
subscription a name, the name is set to ``null``.

When you create a subscription, Realm looks for data matching a query on a
specific object type. In your Flexible Sync subscriptions, you can have
subscriptions on several different object types or several queries on the same
object type.

Get Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Within a ``<RealmProvider>`` that's configured for Flexible Sync, you can access
a collection of all subscriptions for your app. This is called a 
:js-sdk:`SubscriptionSet <Realm.html#subscriptions>`.

.. TODO: realm/reactify

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/node/flexible-sync.snippet.get-subscriptions.js
    :language: javascript

You can use this ``SubscriptionSet`` to add queries to the list of subscriptions and
update existing subscriptions.

Add a Query to the Set of Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Compose queries to add to your Flexible Sync subscriptions using the

> :ref:`query engine <react-native-client-query-engine>`: 

Reviewer: let's rephrase this to be 'using realm query language' or something like that. we don't use the phrase 'query engine' much any more.

   :depth: 3
   :class: singlecol

Flexible Sync uses subscriptions and permissions to determine which
data to sync with your App. The ``@realm/react`` library streamlines permissions

> and queries for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and queries.
```

.. include:: /includes/note-flexible-sync-prerequisite.rst

Prerequisites
-------------

> To use Flexible Sync in a React Native client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can add Flexible Sync subscriptions to a React Native client, you must:
```

#. :ref:`Authenticate a user <react-native-login-anonymous>` in the client
#. :ref:`Configure a synced Realm <react-native-flexible-sync-open-realm>` in the client

.. _react-native-sync-subscribe-to-queryable-fields:

Align Subscriptions with Backend App
------------------------------------

Your client-side subscription queries must align with the Device Sync configuration
in your backend App Services App.

Subscription queries return all objects of a type. You can filter results
with a Realm Query Language query that includes one or more queryable fields.

To learn more about configuring queryable fields, refer to 
:ref:`Queryable Fields <queryable-fields>` in the App Services documentation.

To learn more about the limitations of using Realm Query Language with Flexible Sync,
refer to the :ref:`Flexible Sync RQL Limitations
<react-native-flexible-sync-rql-limitations>` section.

Manage Your Subscriptions
-------------------------

When configuring Flexible Sync on the backend, you specify which fields your
client application can query. In the client application, use the
:js-sdk:`Realm.subscriptions <Realm.html#subscriptions>` property to

> manage a set of subscriptions to specific queries on queryable fields.

Reviewer: i think this paragraph's discussion of queryable fields should be updated b/c recently it was added that when in developer mode, queryable fields are automatically set.

- :ref:`Check the status of subscriptions <react-native-flexible-sync-wait-for-sync>`
- :ref:`Remove subscriptions <react-native-remove-subscription>`

When the data matches the subscription, and the authenticated user has the
appropriate permissions, Device Sync syncs the backend data with the client app.

Subscription sets persist across sessions even if you no longer include
the subscription in your code.
Subscription information is stored in the synced realm's database file.
You must explicitly remove a subscription
for it to stop attempting to sync matching data.

You should name your subscription. This makes updating your subscription easier.

If you do not give your subscription a name, the name is set to ``null`` and 
the subscription is based on the :ref:`Realm Query Language <react-native-query-data>`
(RQL) string. If the RQL string changes and the subscription is not named, you 
won't be able to update your subscription.

When you create a subscription, Realm looks for data matching a query on a
specific object type. In your Flexible Sync subscriptions, you can have
subscriptions on several different object types or several queries on the same

> object type.

Reviewer: @krollins-mdb i don't think we need to factor the answer to this question into this PR since it's an expansion on the current docs. but it should be included somewhere. 

let's wait on andrew's answer, and then we'll see what to do w/ it.

> object type.

Reviewer 2: @mongodben My understanding is that the two queries will be combined, to be saying "give me all dogs older than 10 and give me all Golden Retrievers".  The two dogs you created will be included in the subscribed query.  Also, if you create a 9 year old Golden Retriever, they will also be included.

> object type.

Reviewer: so they're combined w a boolean `OR` operator?

You can do the following with your subscriptions:

- :ref:`Add subscriptions <react-native-sync-add-subscription>`
- :ref:`Configure a realm with initial subscriptions <react-native-sync-bootstrap-initial-subscriptions>`
- :ref:`Get a list of all subscriptions <react-native-get-subscriptions>`
- :ref:`Check the status of subscriptions <react-native-flexible-sync-wait-for-sync>`
- :ref:`Remove subscriptions <react-native-remove-subscription>`

When the data matches the subscription, and the authenticated user has the
appropriate permissions, Device Sync syncs the backend data with the client app.

Subscription sets persist across sessions even if you no longer include
the subscription in your code.
Subscription information is stored in the synced realm's database file.
You must explicitly remove a subscription
for it to stop attempting to sync matching data.

You should name your subscription. This makes updating your subscription easier.

If you do not give your subscription a name, the name is set to ``null`` and 
the subscription is based on the :ref:`Realm Query Language <react-native-query-data>`
(RQL) string. If the RQL string changes and the subscription is not named, you 

> won't be able to update your subscription.

Reviewer: these 2 paragraphs about naming subscriptions should be in the 'Add a Subscription' section i think

When you create a subscription, Realm looks for data matching a query on a
specific object type. In your Flexible Sync subscriptions, you can have
subscriptions on several different object types or several queries on the same
object type.

.. _react-native-get-subscriptions:

Access Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Within a ``<RealmProvider>`` that's configured for Flexible Sync, you can access
a collection of all subscriptions for your app. This is called a 
:js-sdk:`SubscriptionSet <Realm.html#subscriptions>`.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/get-subscriptions.test.snippet.get-subscriptions.tsx
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 12

You can use this ``SubscriptionSet`` to add queries to the list of subscriptions and
update existing subscriptions.

.. _react-native-sync-add-subscription:

Add a Subscription

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: cna you include an example and explanation of a named subscription?

   :js-sdk:`MutableSubscriptionSet.add() <Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#add>`
   method to add a query to the subscription.

``MutableSubscriptionSet.add()`` takes a ``query`` and a
:js-sdk:`SubscriptionOptions <Realm.App.Sync.html#.SubscriptionOptions>` object.
In ``SubscriptionOptions``, you should name your subscription by adding a string
value to ``SubscriptionOptions.name``. This makes updating the subscription easier.

If you do not give your subscription a name, the name is set to ``null`` and 
the subscription is based on the :ref:`Realm Query Language <react-native-query-data>`
(RQL) string. If the RQL string changes and the subscription is not named, you 
won't be able to update your subscription.

When you create a subscription, Realm looks for data matching a query on a
specific object type. In your Flexible Sync subscriptions, you can have
subscriptions on several different object types or several queries on the same
object type.

If you're using ``@realm/react``, you can use the ``useQuery()`` hook instead of

> ``Realm.objects``. However, ``useQuery()`` needs an active subscription to return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:js-sdk:`Realm.objects() <Realm.html#objects>`. However, ``useQuery()`` needs an active subscription to return
```

yet, ``useQuery()`` returns an empty result, which is not a valid ``query`` for 

> ``MutableSubscriptionSet.add()``.

Reviewer: given this, i don't think it makes sense to use the `useQuery` hook in the example. rather would make sense to point users to use approach that works in all contexts. this'd be to use `Realm.objects('Foo')`, perhaps exposed through the `useRealm()` hook?

think the code snippet should be updated and also some of the copy above.

> If you're using ``@realm/react``, you can use the ``useQuery()`` hook instead of
> ``Realm.objects``. However, ``useQuery()`` needs an active subscription to return
> results. If no subscription has been added yet, ``useQuery()`` returns an empty 
> result, which is not a valid ``query`` for ``MutableSubscriptionSet.add()``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a subscription with :js-sdk:`Realm.objects() <Realm.html#objects>`, which you can access with the ``useRealm()`` hook.

If you're using ``@realm/react``, you can use the ``useQuery()`` hook instead of
``Realm.objects()``. However, ``useQuery()`` needs an active subscription to return
results. If no subscription has been added yet, ``useQuery()`` returns an empty 
result, which is not a valid ``query`` for ``MutableSubscriptionSet.add()``.
```

let's lead w a clear indication of what user should do as is reflected in the code example.

>    :js-sdk:`add() <Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#add>`
>    method on the ``MutableSubscriptionSet`` to add a query to the subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :js-sdk:`MutableSubscriptionSet.add() <Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#add>`
   method to add a query to the subscription.
```

> The ``add()`` method on the ``MutableSubscriptionSet`` takes a ``query`` and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``MutableSubscriptionSet.add()`` takes a ``query`` and a
```

> you set ``throwOnUpdate`` to true, adding a subscription with an existing name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you set ``throwOnUpdate: true``, adding a subscription with an existing name
```

but a different query throws an exception.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/add-query-to-subs.test.snippet.add-query.tsx
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 37, 40-43

.. _react-native-sync-bootstrap-initial-subscriptions:

Configure a Realm with Initial Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You must have at least one subscription before you can read from or write to a
Flexible Sync realm. Initial subscriptions let you define subscriptions when you
:ref:`configure a synced realm <react-native-open-a-synced-realm>`.

To open a synced realm with initial subscriptions, add an  ``initialSubscriptions`` 
property to ``<RealmProvider>``'s 
:js-sdk:`SyncConfiguration <Realm.App.Sync.html#~SyncConfiguration>` object.

You **cannot** use the ``@realm/react`` library hooks ``useQuery`` and ``useObject``

> when setting initial subscriptions.

Reviewer: can you add a sentence talking about what you must use? the node.js sdk realm query operations. can potentially link to that page. not sure how to best talk about. 

but think it's important to give reader positive indication of what they **should** use, in addition to what they shouldn't.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/initial-subscriptions.test.snippet.initial-subscriptions.tsx
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 22-26, 42

.. _react-native-get-subscriptions:

Get Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Within a ``<RealmProvider>`` that's configured for Flexible Sync, you can access
a collection of all subscriptions for your app. This is called a 
:js-sdk:`SubscriptionSet <Realm.html#subscriptions>`.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/get-subscriptions.test.snippet.get-subscriptions.tsx
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 42

You can use this ``SubscriptionSet`` to add queries to the list of subscriptions and

> update existing subscriptions.

Reviewer: should this section on Get Subscriptions be above add subscriptions? seems like content is preceding. maybe rename to 'Access Subscriptions'? 

(also think that this request goes contrary to smthn i asked in the previous review, but upon seeing the content here, think it's the right approach)

   :js-sdk:`add() <Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#add>`
   method on the ``MutableSubscriptionSet`` to add a query to the subscription.

.. TODO: realm/reactify

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/node/flexible-sync.snippet.subscribe-to-queryable-fields.js

>      :language: javascript

Reviewer: imo it'd make sense to combine these 2 examples. think would be clearer to consolidate the copy on top, example below. can add comments to clarify example if needed.

you set ``throwOnUpdate`` to true, adding a subscription with an existing name

> but a different query throws an exception.

Reviewer: also pls add this on top of the example.

.. _react-native-sync-add-subscription:
.. _react-native-sync-bootstrap-initial-subscriptions:

Open a Realm with Initial Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You must have at least one subscription before you can read from or write to a
Flexible Sync realm. Initial subscriptions let you define subscriptions as you
:ref:`open a synced realm <react-native-open-a-synced-realm>`.

To open a synced realm with initial subscriptions, you need to add an 
``initialSubscriptions`` property to ``<RealmProvider>``'s 
:js-sdk:`SyncConfiguration <Realm.App.Sync.html#~SyncConfiguration>` object.

.. TODO: realm reactify

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/node/flexible-sync.snippet.create-initial-subscriptions-on-fs-realm.js
   :language: javascript

You can't use the ``@realm/react`` library hooks ``useQuery`` and ``useObject``

> when setting initial subscriptions.

Reviewer: pls put on top of example.

Reviewer: also, for clarity, consider:

```suggestion
You **cannot** use the ``@realm/react`` library hooks ``useQuery`` and ``useObject``
when setting initial subscriptions.
```

.. _react-native-flexible-sync-wait-for-sync:

Check the Status of Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can check a subscription's :js-sdk:`state <Realm.App.Sync.SubscriptionSet.html#state>` 
to see if the server has acknowledged the subscription and the device has 

> downloaded the data locally.

Reviewer: this isn't fully accurate. the `realm.subscriptions.state` isn't checking individual subscription, but all of them. pls refactor.

- Find out when a subscription set is superseded, and you should obtain a
  new instance of the subscription set to write a subscription change

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/check-subs-status.test.snippet.check-sub-status.tsx
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 42

Subscription State "Complete"
`````````````````````````````

The subscription set state "complete" does not mean "sync is done" or "all 
documents have been synced". "Complete" means the following two things have happened:

The subscription has become the active subscription set that is currently being 
synchronized with the server.

The documents that matched the subscription at the time the subscription was 
sent to the server are now on the local device. Note that this does not necessarily 

> include all documents that currently match the subscription.

Reviewer: can you make these 2 things bullet points?

- Find out when a subscription set is superseded, and you should obtain a
  new instance of the subscription set to write a subscription change

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/manage-subscriptions.test.snippet.get-sub-state.tsx
   :language: javascript

Subscription State "Complete"
`````````````````````````````

The subscription set state "complete" does not mean "sync is done" or "all 
documents have been synced". "Complete" means the following two things have happened:

The subscription has become the active subscription set that is currently being 
synchronized with the server.

The documents that matched the subscription at the time the subscription was 
sent to the server are now on the local device. Note that this does not necessarily 
include all documents that currently match the subscription.

The Realm SDK does not provide a way to check whether all documents that match 

> a subscription have synced to the device.

Reviewer 2: I really wish it did.  But I digress...

.. _react-native-sync-add-subscription:
.. _react-native-sync-bootstrap-initial-subscriptions:

> Open a Realm with Initial Subscriptions

Reviewer 2: As commented before, I would bring this higher up into the document.

When you remove a subscription query, the server also removes synced data from
the client device.

If you're using ``@realm/react``, these examples assume you're working with a
component that's nested inside ``<RealmProvider>``, like the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/react-native/ts/remove-subscriptions.test.snippet.remove-subscriptions-full.tsx
   :language: javascript

>    :emphasize-lines: 40-44

Reviewer: imo it distracts from the example to show the nested components here. think it'd be clearer to just show `< SubscriptionManager>` component

Remove a Subscription by Query
``````````````````````````````

You can remove a specific subscription by query by executing a transaction on
the subscriptions set. Pass the query to the :js-sdk:`remove()
<Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#remove>` method on

> ``MutableSubscriptionSet`` within a transaction.

Reviewer: could you refactor this and subsequent similarly structured lines to `MutableSubscriptionSet.remove()` rather than mention object and method separately as is done here?

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/node/flexible-sync.snippet.remove-single-subscription.js

>     :language: javascript

Author: We'll need to update all the node tests when we look over that SDK. We can clean it up then. 😆

- Find out when a subscription set is superseded, and you should obtain a
  new instance of the subscription set to write a subscription change

.. TODO: realm reactify

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/node/flexible-sync.snippet.log-subscription-state.js 
    :language: javascript

> .. include:: /includes/note-sync-state-complete.rst

Reviewer: imo this shouldn't be an admonition, it's just description of what's going on here.

Remove a Subscription by Query
``````````````````````````````

You can remove a specific subscription by query by executing a transaction on
the subscriptions set. Pass the query to the :js-sdk:`remove()
<Realm.App.Sync.MutableSubscriptionSet.html#remove>` method on
``MutableSubscriptionSet`` within a transaction.

.. TODO: Update to reflect object type instead of owner

> 
> In the following example, the subscription to tasks with an owner named 'Ben' is
> removed from the subscriptions set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

we dont describe the examples on this page. also think generally bad practice to explain an example in page copy when what's going on is self evident or could be explained in small comment.
